---
layout: post
title: The Thought before Time.
date: 2020-08-08
description: Discussing Genesis 1:3-4
---

Disclaimer: Personal thoughts on theology & the existence of God.

Recently I’ve been learning about quantum state superpositions, how a particle or system can be in a superposition of many different possibilities simultaneously. Whilst pondering that, it led me to think of how God, being infinite, is able to know every superposition the universe is in. 

He knows exactly every outcome any given situation will produce. Knowing this information He’s able to know what each of us will do, while retaining our free-will. I then became curious about the creation account in Genesis and re-read Chapter 1. Verses 3-4 really stuck out to me.

> “And God said, “Let there be light,” and there was light. 4 God saw that the light was good and he separated the light from the darkness.” - Genesis 1:3-4

At first glance these verses give a straightforward account to creation. But at further inspection these verses are nothing short of incredible. There is so much complexity, and emotion that can be drawn from these two verses if you begin to think about what’s happening here. 

These verses describe God laying down the foundations of the universe, and creating time itself. When God created the universe he created it in its entirety; from beginning to end. Remember, God is infinite in every capacity, thus He saw every moment that the universe He was about to create would experience.

He knows every moment of time intimately. 

He saw Humanity’s rise and fall, its struggle to find purpose and meaning amidst the chaos followed by Adam & Eve’s decision to rebel against Him.

He saw every war that would be fought.
He saw the struggle of light against the darkness. 
He heard every prayer that would ever be prayed.
He saw His people crying out to Him for help in their time of need.
He saw every moment, every emotion, thought and experience.
All that characterizes consciousness and humanity’s existence. All from start to finish.

He even saw Jesus dying on a cross for the creation he had yet to create; humanity.

And even though He observed all of what would transpire within the bounds of the universe he was about to establish, he uttered the words that would bring it into existence “...Let there be light”. And in those words every string of thought in the vastness of time itself was created.

He knew evil would be present in it.You could ask the question if it was morally right for God to create the universe even though He knew what would happen in it, but that requires us, the creation, to judge our Creator, when we are the ones that are innately flawed and have sinned against Him.

If you accept that God is infinite in every capacity, including Wisdom, then the question asked becomes irrelevant. If we exist, and we do, then it logically follows that God determined that it is better for the Universe to exist than to not.

I believe it was out of love that God decided to go through with creation, It is out of love that right now He’s patiently waiting for the great commission to conclude. It was out of love that He sent His son Jesus to save humanity.

To exist speaks to the testament of God’s incalculable love and grace towards mankind, even before the axioms that characterized reality were in place. He thought of us, saw us, empathized with us, and created us so that we may glorify Him. 

> “For he chose us in him before the creation of the world to be holy and blameless in his sight. In love” - Ephesians 1:4

Whatever life may throw our way, knowing that God saw every moment before time even existed is such a powerful thought. Now the question is if we will trust in Him when life gets rough, will we tell God that our circumstances are unfair and unjust? Or will we recognize that He’s seen what we’d go through before time itself, and submit to His will for our lives, and reflect upon the truths of His character. 

Our ability to question or accuse God of being unjust in times of trial directly attests to God’s character believe it or not. That even when we question or doubt His plan, He allows us to question Him, even though He upholds every fabric of your being. Questioning is a necessary element to free-will.

As a Christian, naturally I believe in the infallibility of the Bible. It brings me comfort knowing that my future is intimately known by the God that created all things, and that He deemed it worthy of existence. Before He brought the universe into existence He saw my life, all lives, every moment, and He said it was good.


> “I am the Alpha and the Omega, the First and the Last, the Beginning and the End.” - Revelation 22:13

